[EP] Remote Artifacts (#419)
shipwright-io/build: docs/proposals/remote-artifacts.md

<!--
Copyright The Shipwright Contributors

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->

---
title: remote-artifacts
authors:
  - "@otaviof"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2020-10-02
last-updated:  2020-10-02
status: provisional
---

> Shipwright Remote Artifacts

Reviewer: I have a conceptual issue with the word artifacts. We already have "artifacts" that are remote, like "github" repositories.

> Shipwright Remote Artifacts

Author: The idea the "remote artifacts" is trying to portray is another source of data, different in essence from VCS (i.e. Git).

While VCS (version control system) is a basic building block for this operator, the remote artifacts represents a complementary source of data. The remote artifacts will hold data that are not meant to be manipulated with a VCS, like binary produced by third party building systems, images, tarballs, etc.

The most common use for remote artifacts is with third party building systems, like Nexus, jFrog Artifactory, Chocolatey, among many others. In this case a remote system is responsible by this data, while with a VCS the developer takes control.

I hope this clarify that we have a additional concept to introduce, which works sightly different than VCS ("github") data, and therefore, deserves a specific term to represent this concept.

> Shipwright Remote Artifacts

Reviewer: I would still prefer to call it something like "Shipwright additional remote artifacts support" . I honestly see a VCS as a remote artifact.

---------------------------

# Summary

Remote artifacts are often dependencies of the software building process, and hence are also

> required when dealing with container images. This enhancement proposal focuses on adding a build

Author: I might not always be subject to compilation, a remote artifact is a arbitrary data blob very often controlled by a external system.

> required when dealing with container images. This enhancement proposal focuses on adding a build

Reviewer 2: I'd clarify the language to focus on "downloading binary files or other objects not found in git-based version control."

> required when dealing with container images. This enhancement proposal focuses on adding a build

Reviewer: > "downloading binary files or other objects not found in git-based version control."

+1

> artifacts abstraction to Shipwright's Operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
artifacts abstraction to Shipwright's Build API.
```

> # Motivation

Author: Yeah, I think the EP can use rewording to let the objective/motivation easier to understand. I'll push changes soon.

> # Motivation

Reviewer: tahnks

> # Motivation

Author: Please consider it again.

> # Motivation

Reviewer: looks much better, resolving

the concept of Artifacts. In other words, remote entities that will be available for the image
build process.

End users will be allowed to declare artifacts that represent remote dependencies alongside
Builds, and easily link them together. For example, a Java application which downloads certain
jars into the classpath, a Node.js application adding external images, and so forth.

## Goals

*   Provide means to declare remote artifacts, dependencies that can be employed on builds;
*   Create the mechanism to download and prepare remote artifacts for builds;

## Non-Goals

*   Automate the upload of local artifacts into the cluster;
*   Manage remote artifacts;
*   Amend container images created by the given `BuildStrategy`;
*   Walking a remote directory tree, similarly to a `git checkout`;

# Proposal

The enhancement proposal is centered around the idea of declaring external dependencies, here
called "artifacts", and being able to use them during the container image building process.

## Build Artifacts

The remote artifacts will be directly expressed in the body of a `Build` resource, as the
following example:

```yml
---

> apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1

Author: The idea is not to describe how the dependency management works, but how remote artifacts will be brought into play from remote. So, maybe we should adopt a simpler example that leaves less room for confusion?

> apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1

Reviewer: Not sure, I think this is a must, we should cover how to deal with those dependencies, otherwise we could eventually build a container image that cannot run due to missing dependencies, what do you think?

kind: Build
metadata:
  name: nexus-jar
spec:
  artifacts:
    - name: main-jar
      url: https://nexus.company.com/app/main.jar

>       path: $(workspace)/classpath/main.jar

Reviewer 3: Should we maybe consider extending the source section instead ?

```yaml
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: nexus-jar
spec:
  sources
    # A source of type=git must only exist once or be absent
    - type: git
      url: git@github.ibm.com:SCHWARZS/test-project.git
      revision: sascha-test
      credentials:
        name: ibm-github
    # A source of type=http can exist multiple times
    - type: http
      url: https://nexus.company.com/app/main.jar
      path: classpath/main.jar # Not sure if I would allow values that do not start with ${workspace} here but instead always have that as prefix
    # Credentials support for whatever we want, start with basic auth only, client-cert maybe in the future, we will need to determine it based on how the secret looks
    - type: http
      url: https://restricted.server.com/lib.jar
      credentials:
        name: restricted-server
      path: classpath/lib.jar
    # A source of type=http can have an optional extract flag set to true which means that path is interpreted as a directory instead of a file and the file content is extracted (TBD: can we autodetect the file type or do we need to make extract an enum or add another compressiontype parameter?)
    - type: http
      url: https://www.myserver.com/sources.zip
      extract: true
      path: sources
```

This would be an extensible mechanism. In the future we might support other types (loading from maybe some configmap where the cli placed the local sources).

Reviewer 3: I think that would be hard. An HTTPS URL can be a public Git repository (especially as we do not require the `.git` suffix at the moment), a SubVersion repository, a plain file and probably more.

Author: I think given the distinction for types of data, one being VCS and the other remote artifacts, I think they should be described in different logical blocks. So, we also have a clear separation between those two concerts.

Reviewer 3: @otaviof a VCS resource is also remote. There is "just" a different protocol to download them.

Reviewer 2: > This would be an extensible mechanism. In the future we might support other types (loading from maybe some configmap where the cli placed the local sources).

`ConfigMap` is certainly a valid use case, though with a cli upload I see PersistentVolume/PVC being a more likely result.

Another thing we should clarify is that "sources" are things that are intended to be present in the resulting image. There is a separate use case for "volume" support (like caches), in which case the data present in the volume is not included in the resulting container image.

Reviewer 2: > ```yaml
> ...
> spec:
>   sources
>     # A source of type=git must only exist once or be absent
>     - type: git
>       url: git@github.ibm.com:SCHWARZS/test-project.git
>       revision: sascha-test
>       credentials:
>         name: ibm-github

Wouldn't we want to employ the discriminator pattern?

```yaml
spec:
  sources:
  - name: git
    type: Git
    git:
      url: ...
...
```

(note that `type: Git` may not be required, apimachinery can fill it in).

Reviewer: Same line of thought, I see a VCS as yet another remote artifact. I´m not able to understand the distinction.

Author: Please consider latest commit, I'm adding a initial `.spec.sources` support with you inputs.

Reviewer: @otaviof thanks, I took a look.

> http: settings for http, namely path (optional);

Is the new field from above required? we already have something call `contextDir`, can this serve the same purpose?

@adambkaplan   @SaschaSchwarze0 @otaviof I have some concerns around `spec.sources`. First of all I think introducing a `type` is a nice way to distinguish the different assets(remote files, git,etc). I´m struggling to understand the value of moving from of a map(spec.source) into a list(spec.sources). My rational is:

- This proposal does not explains the use cases on why a list is needed
- This will break the current API
- `spec.source` is for me one of the structs that is very simple to understand, and I would like to keep it this way. Adding support for a list of sources is going to add complexity on that API level.
- supporting `spec.sources` will introduce some code complexity when generating the Taskrun. It would be good to  highlight those and decide if it worth the effort.

@sbose78 probably we want your feedback also. Also, do we have some good references on how Build v1 did it(shouldnt bias us)?, but it will help to understand the rational there.

```

A new attribute, .spec.artifacts will be added, containing a slice of types with:

> *   **Name**: The actual name of the artifact, optional;

Reviewer 2: I would make `Name` required - if artifacts and/or sources are going to be a list, we need a means of doing strategic merge patching [1]. Per discussions I've had with sig-apimachinery members, having the merge patch key be required is strongly recommend.

https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/update-api-object-kubectl-patch/#notes-on-the-strategic-merge-patch

Author: Indeed, that's a good addition.

application's `classpath` directory.

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildArtifact
metadata:
  name: nexus-jars
spec:
  artifacts:
    - name: main-jar
      url: https://nexus.company.com/app/main.jar
      path: $(workspace)/classpath/main.jar
```

## Using Artifacts

Giving the artifacts declared, a developer will be able to include those artifacts in Build
resources as per the following example:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: java-application
spec:
  artifacts:
    - nexus-jars
```

By adding spec.artifacts, the operator will generate build steps to download external data, and
place it in the expected location before the build strategy.Furthermore, developers will be able
to overwrite artifacts on `BuildRun` level, allowing for more use-cases on which different sets of
artifacts is required.

## Steps and Helper

Artifacts are requirements for the build process, thus downloading and preparing artifacts must
happen before the build process starts. To achieve the objective, the operator will generate a new
task step to download the artifacts.

> The download may happen using existing open-source software, more specifically `wget`. The

Reviewer: The "download" looks critical. We get this for free from tekton, Wouldn´t it make more sense to do this natively with "golang" or to see if Tekton have already something for us? e.g. they do not use a "git" binary for pulling, they have their own git [pkg](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/master/pkg/git/git.go)

Author: I understand what Tekton does for the VCS (source-code), but what would it do for remote artifacts? Could we use Tekton to download them as well?

Reviewer 2: It does not appear such a resource type exists. If we accept this proposal, I recommend submitting a TEP to see if we can get upstream Tekton buy-in.

Reviewer: I was mainly referring to do a native implementation in go, I would like to avoid introducing extra binaries dependencies in the code. We might not need Tekton at all.

Author: I would like to explore the Tekton resource idea further, for the record.

Reviewer: I think we all agree this is not enforcing the usage of `wget` and that another more native implementation(e.g. tekton way) might be reused. Can we mention this somewhere?

Reviewer 4: Can we leverage the Tekton source to enable storage or something first?:
https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/master/docs/resources.md#resource-types

I think `wget` is a little weak. How abour the private resource (with auth) or ftp?

Reviewer 5: `PipelineResources` at this time are most likely not going to get out of alpha stage.  There has been a fair amount of consternation and churn around how exactly how to move forward, though.

But minimally I would not advise a `PipelineResource` styled path.

That said, if I had to pick, I'd say "custom tasks" might be the most likely path along the "tekton resource" angle.  Also, submitting something "similar" but different most likely would get the response of "look at custom tasks".

See https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/master/teps/0002-custom-tasks.md for details.

Reviewer 5: there is also a "specializing task" which has some literature around it but now TEP as of yet

Reviewer 6: Yeah, a specific resource in upstream Tekton would be a hard sell at the moment given the direction `PipelineResources` is taking.

```

And, the alternative logo:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildArtifact
metadata:
  name: axes-logo
spec:
  artifacts:
    - name: axes-logo
      url: https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2587818/92100668-c1ebbd80-ede4-11ea-9e8a-7379c3875ea0.png
      path: $(workspace)/assets/images/shipwright-logo.png
```

Then, we can create the `Build` resource, as per:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: typescript-ex
spec:
  strategy:
    name: buildpacks-v3
    kind: ClusterBuildStrategy
  source:
    url: https://github.com/otaviof/typescript-ex.git
  artifacts:
    - ship-logo
  output:
    image: quay.io/otaviof/typescript-ex:latest
```

Now, we can create two `BuildRun` resources, overwriting `.spec.artifacts` to compose the alternative build. For instance:

```
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildRun
metadata:
  name: typescript-ex
spec:
  buildRef:
    name: typescript-ex
```

Also:

```
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildRun
metadata:
  name: typescript-ex-alternative-logo
spec:
  buildRef:
    name: typescript-ex
  output:
    image: quay.io/otaviof/typescript-ex:alternative
  artifacts:

>     - axes-logo

Reviewer 2: This is where making the `name` required and having strategic merge patching becomes critical. Does having an override list here mean "replace all" or "replace only these"

the concept of Artifacts. In other words, remote entities that will be available for the image
build process.

End users will be able to include remote artifacts as a build runtime dependency, artifacts
controlled by remote systems will be downloaded before the build process starts. Those artifacts may
be a pre-compile binary, `jar` files, `war` files, etc.

## Goals

*   Provide means to declare remote artifacts, dependencies that can be employed on builds;
*   Create the mechanism to download and prepare remote artifacts for builds;

## Non-Goals

*   Automate the upload of local artifacts into the cluster;
*   Manage remote artifacts;
*   Amend container images created by the given `BuildStrategy`;
*   Walking a remote directory tree, similarly to a `git checkout`;

# Proposal

The enhancement proposal is centered around the idea of declaring external dependencies, here
called "artifacts", and being able to use them during the container image building process.

## Build Artifacts

The remote artifacts will be directly expressed in the body of a `Build` resource, as the
following example:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:

>   sources:

Reviewer 7: I am wondering if `sources` really makes sense here.  I think of source as a git repository or something to that affect.  Maybe this should be something more along the lines of `dependencies` like you would list in a maven file?

Reviewer 3: My vote is for `inputs` which would be a symmetric naming together with the `output` image that we already have in the Build.

Author: @SaschaSchwarze0 are you okay with `sources` and the path ahead to unify them later on?

Reviewer 3: > @SaschaSchwarze0 are you okay with `sources` and the path ahead to unify them later on?

I am okay with `sources`, yes. (But I doubt we would ever change this in the future. ;-) )

Reviewer: I´m concerned more than one person is not fully buying the `spec.sources` , what are the implications for this EP to move into `spec.inputs` rather than `spec.sources`, it will also keep the API clean for now. And in another EP we will deal with multiple gits, where we can tackle that modifications to `spec.source`.

Author: I'm okay to use `.spec.inputs` for this purpose. Do we have objections on `.spec.inputs`?

Reviewer: not from my side :)

Author: @sbose78, @adambkaplan, @gabemontero, @coreydaley would you object to use `.spect.inputs` instead?

    - name: license-file
      type: http

>       url: https://licenses.company.com/customer-id/license.tar

Reviewer 6: Could you use a more realistic example like a jar artifact in all examples, please?

Author: The initial text was using a Jar file, but it wind up in questions about the dependency management itself. So, moved that to a simpler thing, a license file.

Author: Please note a more Java like example is [kept here](https://github.com/otaviof/build/blob/01ace39a774f7a1db0d5ae530a6693f9a0fcdb09/docs/proposals/remote-artifacts.md#steps-and-helper).

      http:
        path: $(workspace)/licenses/license.tar
```

The `source` section will be renamed to `sources` in order to accommodate more `type`s of inputs.
Each entry will be composed of the following attributes:

> - `name`: source name (required);

Reviewer 7: I feel like name is superfluous here, what is the point of having it?

- `type`: input source type, `git` or `http` (required);

> - `sourceRef`: use a external resource, the name in this field is the resource name (optional);

Reviewer 7: Can you expand upon this fields usage?

Author: I'm moving the field to the new "Alternatives" section at the end.

- `url`: the URL of the repository or remote artifact (optional);
- `credentials`: the credentials to interact with the artifact (optional);

> - `http`: settings for `http`, namely `path` (optional);

Reviewer 7: What is `path` for here? Is this the local path that the file will be downloaded to? Why is it only available for the "http" type? Seems like `path` should be a top level element.

Author: I've amended to explain `.path` is a inner attribute, please consider latest change.

> - `git`: settings for `git`, namely `revision` (optional);

Reviewer 7: Could we eliminate `revision` and just use standard git paths that reference a revision in the `url`?

Author: I'm rewording this to mention it stays as original.

The resource `UID`/`GID` will be defined by the same user running the Tekton task, later on, we
can extend the API to support arbitrary configuration.

### Standalone CRD

Alternatively, we may define the artifacts as a standalone CRD, that is a `BuildSource`
resource. The advantage of this design is being able to exchange, and reuse, artifacts on several
builds. For instance, if two projects are sharing a common logo image, both `Builds` will refer to
the same `BuildSource`.

The following snippet shows how an Artifact (`BuildSource`) will be represented.

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildSource
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:
  sources:
    - type: http

>       url: https://licenses.company.com/customer-id/license.tar

Reviewer 6: Could you use a more realistic example like a jar artifact in all examples, please?

Author: Same as in [here](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/pull/419/files#r520463394).

      http:
        path: $(workspace)/licenses/license.tar
```

## Usage

The usage of this feature is based on declaring a slice of `.spec.sources` and later on overwriting
entries using `BuildRun` resource. For instance:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: example
spec:
  sources:
    - name: license-file
```

Could have its `license-file` overwritten in a `BuildRun` with:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildRun
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:
  buildRef:
    name: example
  sources:
    - name: license-file
      sourceRef: alternative-file
```

## Steps and Helper

Artifacts are requirements for the build process, thus downloading and preparing artifacts must
happen before the build process starts. To achieve the objective, the operator will generate a new
task step to download the artifacts.

> The download may happen using existing open-source software, more specifically `wget`. The

Reviewer 7: I would prefer to see us use pure golang for the downloading instead of an external tool such as wget, i don't like having to rely on os provided tools.

Reviewer 3: I like idea from Corey. We will eventually face a Build which has a longer list of sources. For all these sources beside the git source (which we will probably want to continue to handle using Tekton's Git resource), I envision one Task step implemented by ourselves using Golang. Within our code we can then do optimizations like parallel downloads for different sources and also can handle and report errors in a better way than by invoking an external command.

Author: I also like the idea of creating or own tool for that purpose. However, I see `wget` as a simple starting point, on which we could potentially develop our own tool in parallel.

So how about get started with `wget` and evaluate the new tooling on its own track?

Reviewer: I raised the same concern on some comments ago, I do not see why we need to rely on a binary. https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/pull/419#discussion_r501795584

Reviewer 2: I think we can agree that we can implement the downloader, regardless of whether we build our own in go vs. "buy" it (by using a fixed container image with `wget`). IMO deciding which approach to take is beyond what is necessary to mark this EP as "implementable".

container image which contains this software will be specified via environment variable, and when
not informed will use a default value.

> Therefore, the operator needs to generate `wget` commands with arguments in order to download the

Reviewer 6: > the operator needs to generate `wget` commands with arguments in order to download the

_The buildrun controller needs to generate a TaskRun step that would generate the `wget` command to download the artifacts specified_

Author: Thanks, that's a good addition. Please consider latest commit (`01ace39`)

The step generated by the operator will look like the following:

```yml
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: artifact-download
spec:
  steps:
    - name: artifact-download
      image: busybox:latest
      command:
        - /bin/bash
      args:
        - -c
        - >
          wget --output="/workspace/source/classpath/main.jar" https://nexus.company.com/app/main.jar && \
          chown 1000:1001 /workspace/source/classpath/main.jar && \
          chmod 0644 /workspace/source/classpath/main.jar
```

## Example Use-Case

Using [Shipwright's proposed logos](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/issues/325) as example,
let's assume we are building a [TypeScript application](https://github.com/otaviof/typescript-ex)
which will use the project logo, and we would like to create two different builds, one with the
default project logo, and another with the alternative.

By using remote artifacts, we can keep the separation of project source code and assets, and we
can describe those resources as:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildSource
metadata:
  name: ship-logo
spec:
  sources:
    - name: project-logo
      type: http

>       url: https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2587818/92114986-69bfb600-edfa-11ea-820e-96cdb1014f58.png

Reviewer 6: Could you use a more realistic example like a jar artifact in all examples, please?

Author: Same as in [here](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/pull/419/files#r520463394).

following example:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:
  sources:
    - name: license-file
      type: http
      url: https://licenses.company.com/customer-id/license.tar
      http:
        path: $(workspace)/licenses/license.tar
```

We will add `sources` section, side by side with current `source`. The idea is to accommodate both
constructions in `v1alpha1`, and save API breaking changes for upcoming `v1beta1`.

The new `sources` will contain the following attributes:

- `name`: source name (required);
- `type`: input source type, `git` or `http` (required);
- `sourceRef`: use a external resource, the name in this field is the resource name (optional);
- `url`: the URL of the repository or remote artifact (optional);
- `credentials`: the credentials to interact with the artifact (optional);
- `http`: settings for `http`, namely `path` (optional);
- `git`: settings for `git`, namely `revision` (optional);

The resource `UID`/`GID` will be defined by the same user running the Tekton task, later on, we
can extend the API to support arbitrary configuration.

### Single vs. Multiple Git Repositories

> In `v1alpha1` it's expected to inform the Git repository on `.spec.source`, and external artifacts
> informed on `.spec.sources`, therefore, we can address adding this new feature and managing multiple
> Git repositories support in different tracks.
> 
> For upcoming work, supporting multiple Git repositories will involve re-defining `/workspace/source`
> location and `$workspace` placeholder.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to clarify this section a bit:

```suggestion
For the initial implementation, we will only support one git repository that is specified in `.spec.source`.
Remote artifacts will be specified n `.spec.sources` only.

We will address supporting multipe Git repositories in a future enhancement proposal. This will involve re-defining `/workspace/source` location and the `$workspace` placeholder.
```

### Standalone CRD

Alternatively, we may define the artifacts as a standalone CRD, that is a `BuildSource`
resource. The advantage of this design is being able to exchange, and reuse, artifacts on several
builds. For instance, if two projects are sharing a common logo image, both `Builds` will refer to
the same `BuildSource`.

The following snippet shows how an Artifact (`BuildSource`) will be represented.

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildSource
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:
  sources:
    - name: license.tar
      type: http
      url: https://licenses.company.com/customer-id/license.tar
      http:
        path: $(workspace)/licenses/license.tar

> ```

Reviewer 3: A question around the `BuildSource`. Within the `Build`'s `spec.sources`, it is used to from one source entry to reference an external definition. Based on that, may expectation would be that the external build source would only contain a single spec like this:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildSource
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:
  type: http
  url: https://licenses.company.com/customer-id/license.tar
  http:
    path: $(workspace)/licenses/license.tar
```

Should we have multiple entries with their own name in the `BuildSource`, then we'll have to define how this is merged with the other entries in the `Build`'s sources.

Author: I think here we may benefit from a slice of entries. Given that we may be downloading a number of dependencies from a single external source, and we can bundle together in this slice fashion. It also keeps aligned with `Build` resource where it will be available as a array/slice as well.

## Usage

The usage of this feature is based on declaring a slice of `.spec.sources` and later on overwriting
entries using `BuildRun` resource. For instance:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: example
spec:
  sources:

>     - name: license-file

Reviewer 2: Let's update the example to show the initial implementation with Git source set in `spec.source`, and external artifacts in `spec.sources`.

constructions in `v1alpha1`, and save API breaking changes for upcoming `v1beta1`.

The new `sources` will contain the following attributes:

- `name`: source name (required);
- `type`: input source type, `git` or `http` (required);
- `sourceRef`: use a external resource, the name in this field is the resource name (optional);
- `url`: the URL of the repository or remote artifact (optional);
- `credentials`: the credentials to interact with the artifact (optional);
- `http`: settings for `http`, namely `path` (optional);
- `git`: settings for `git`, namely `revision` (optional);

The resource `UID`/`GID` will be defined by the same user running the Tekton task, later on, we
can extend the API to support arbitrary configuration.

### Single vs. Multiple Git Repositories

For the initial implementation, we will only support one git repository that is specified in `.spec.source`.
Remote artifacts will be specified n `.spec.sources` only.

We will address supporting multipe Git repositories in a future enhancement proposal. This will involve re-defining `/workspace/source` location and the `$workspace` placeholder.

> ### Standalone CRD

Reviewer 2: This should be placed in an "Alternatives" section at the bottom of the proposal. I believe we decided that we are not going to pursue this approach.

Leaving this in the main body confuses what is in the proposal vs. out. See the proposal template for guidance:

https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/master/docs/proposals/guidelines/proposal-template.md

Author: Following the template, the standalone CRD alternative design was moved into a section at the end.

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Build
metadata:
  name: example
spec:
  source:
    # ...
  sources:
    - name: license-file
```

Could have its `license-file` overwritten in a `BuildRun` with:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildRun
metadata:
  name: license-file
spec:
  buildRef:
    name: example
  sources:
    - name: license-file
      sourceRef: alternative-file
```

## Steps and Helper

Artifacts are requirements for the build process, thus downloading and preparing artifacts must
happen before the build process starts. To achieve the objective, the operator will generate a new
task step to download the artifacts.

The download may happen using existing open-source software, more specifically `wget`. The
container image which contains this software will be specified via environment variable, and when
not informed will use a default value.

Therefore, the `buildrun` controller needs to generate a `TaskRun` step, having a `wget` commands
plus arguments, to download the specified artifacts.

The step generated by the operator will look like the following:

```yml
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1

> kind: Task

Reviewer 2: nit - this would be a `TaskRun`

Author: Thanks.

metadata:
  name: artifact-download
spec:
  steps:
    - name: artifact-download
      image: busybox:latest
      command:
        - /bin/bash
      args:
        - -c
        - >
          wget --output="/workspace/source/classpath/main.jar" https://nexus.company.com/app/main.jar && \
          chown 1000:1001 /workspace/source/classpath/main.jar && \
          chmod 0644 /workspace/source/classpath/main.jar
```

## Example Use-Case

Using [Shipwright's proposed logos](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/issues/325) as example,
let's assume we are building a [TypeScript application](https://github.com/otaviof/typescript-ex)
which will use the project logo, and we would like to create two different builds, one with the
default project logo, and another with the alternative.

By using remote artifacts, we can keep the separation of project source code and assets, and we
can describe those resources as:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1

> kind: BuildSource

Reviewer 2: This references the original CRD style of declaring a downloaded resource, which IIRC we are not pursuing. Please update.

Author: Moved to the new "Alternatives" section, please consider.

let's assume we are building a [TypeScript application](https://github.com/otaviof/typescript-ex)
which will use the project logo, and we would like to create two different builds, one with the
default project logo, and another with the alternative.

By using remote artifacts, we can keep the separation of project source code and assets, and we
can describe those resources as:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildSource
metadata:
  name: ship-logo
spec:
  sources:
    - name: project-logo
      type: http
      url: https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2587818/92114986-69bfb600-edfa-11ea-820e-96cdb1014f58.png
      http:
        path: $(workspace)/assets/images/shipwright-logo.png
```

And, the alternative logo:

```yml
---
apiVersion: build.dev/v1alpha1
kind: BuildSource
metadata:
  name: axes-logo
spec:
  sources:
    - name: project-logo
      type: http
      url: https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2587818/92100668-c1ebbd80-ede4-11ea-9e8a-7379c3875ea0.png
      http:
        path: $(workspace)/assets/images/shipwright-logo.png
```

Then, we can create the `Build` resource, as per:

> ```yml

Reviewer: @otaviof pls correct me if I´m wrong,  but here the example is based on the assumption that we support a new `BuildSource` CRD. If we do not have the `BuildSource` CRD in place, then we will still need to have 

- A Build instance to define the git source code
- Two BuildRuns, each one overriding the `spec.sources` for each logo type

is the above correct?

Author: Yes, correct @qu1queee. The example was made to illustrate both scenarios at once, but it might have been too much leaning towards the "Alternative" scenario.

Reviewer: ok, thanks
